Now let's talk about control structures, logic, loops,
and all that kind of stuff.
So the first kind of control structure we're gonna deal with
is an if statement.
And every language has an if statement.
We have a whole bunch of logical operators
that we just got done talking about.
Equals, the double equals is the question mark.
Triple equals is the same as and same type as.
Not equals the not, and then the and and the or.
Double ampersand is and, and the double vertical bar is or.
And so triple equals and exclamation double equals.
And curly braces are the way that we talk about
the begin and end of the blocks
that are affected by the if statement.
So other than that, we say if parent c answer equals 42,
this is kind of the question that we're gonna ask
and that's going to lead to a true or a false.
If it's true, of course the first block is gonna execute
and then there's an else and then if that result is false,
the question is false,
then the else section is gonna execute.
And there can be more than one line in here.
I'm just showing one line to keep it small on the screen.
So when this code all runs, it basically comes in,
answer is 42, then this is true,
answer equals 42 is true.
It runs console log hello world,
then skips the else clause and it's all done.
So the output of this is indeed hello world.
There's multi-way ifs and you can hang them together
just like with else ifs, just like in Python.
And it does it in order.
If this is false, if the first if is false,
it checks the else if and as soon as that's true,
it runs that block of code and then hops out to the end.
It doesn't check all of the if questions simultaneously.
And you can optionally have an else clause
so that if none of the if else if clauses are true,
then it just falls through and runs the code
in the else block.
You can have an indeterminate loop,
a while loop that runs until something becomes true.
It's a zero trip loop,
which means that it runs a minimum of zero times,
which means it's effectively functions the first time through
like an if statement.
So while fuel greater than one, do this thing in the block,
is really like an if fuel greater than run,
if fuel is greater than one, do this block.
Although in this case, I've built myself an infinite loop
because fuel starts out at 10 and I say,
while fuel is greater than one, console.log room,
which means it's just gonna do that forever.
And that's because I didn't change the iteration variable,
in this case fuel, and usually we construct these
in a way that they terminate eventually.
And so I've done a much better job in the second one
where I set fuel to 10 and I say,
while fuel is greater than one,
and inside the loop I console.log room,
and then I subtract one, and I go up and up and up and up,
and then it's gonna go and then fuel will eventually
get to zero and then it will exit out the loop and finish.
And so this here is an infinite loop,
and this is a finite loop.
While loops are always a little tricky
'cause you've gotta construct the iteration variable
or make sure you know how to get out of the loop.
The for loop is a counted loop and it's going to run,
and so there's three parts to it,
and they're separated by semicolons.
It looks really complex, but it's not.
So you make an iteration variable.
The first part up to the semicolon is the code
that runs before the loop starts.
So I'm gonna set this variable count equals one.
The second part is like a while,
and it's a top test zero trip loop,
and as long as count remains less than or equal to six,
then the body loop is gonna execute,
and then each time at the bottom of the loop,
we're gonna add one.
So this is gonna go one, two, three, four, five, six.
When it's equal to six, it's gonna run the sixth time,
but then it's gonna come up and be seven,
but then the loop is not going to run.
And so that's what's called a counted loop,
where we have some variable that's just running through
a set of numbers.
In Python, we would use range to do this kind of a thing.
Now, like in Python, we've got the break statement,
and the break statement just says,
I'm gonna get out of this loop.
So if this line executes, it looks at the,
if there's more than one loop, it's the innermost loop,
and it just basically escapes the loop
and moves on to the line of code
that follows the loop immediately.
Just, if it's done, get out.
Don't execute another line.
It doesn't run that next, the rest of the iteration.
It just skips out of the loop completely.
Continue is another very useful thing.
You can basically say, I wanna give up on this iteration
and go back up and do the next iteration,
but the thing is this increment usually is this third part
of the for loop.
If you say continue, that actually runs.
So it actually, continue goes and does the plus plus,
and then it does the check,
and then it either continues to run back here,
or it jumps out if count is now greater than 10.
And so continue works pretty much the same
in loops in JavaScript as it does in Python.
So you can also loop through objects,
and so here's an object that has three attributes,
golf, tennis, and ping,
and I can say for ball and balls,
and then that means that this iteration variable
is gonna walk through the keys or the attributes.
So it's gonna be golf, ping, and tennis,
and then I can use the lookup syntax
to look up balls sub golf, balls sub tennis,
and balls sub ping, and then print all those things out.
So that's what's called a definite loop
that's looping through an object that we're going to see.
Now when you're looping through an array,
which is a linear list,
you actually use a counted loop, not a definite loop.
But objects, which are like dictionaries,
which are like associative arrays,
will use definite loops to loop through them.
So that is a quick romp through JavaScript,
not so much to get to the point
where you can write a bunch of JavaScript,
but so you can read it,
and then when you get a syntax there,
hopefully you can fix it.
(upbeat music)